The theory of carcinogenesis describes
how chemicals called initiators
cause DNA damage.
If the impact of the initiator
on DNA cannot be repaired,
these mutations can lead to
uncontrolled growth of the initiated cell.
Another factor, a promoter,
can stimulate cell proliferation,
leading to preneoplastic cells.
These cells can further mutate to neoplastic,
or cancerous cells, becoming a malignant
tumor, which can increase rapidly
in size.
If cells migrate out from the original location
and establish in another place,
the cancer has metastasized.
Chemo-preventive blocking agents can stop
the DNA repair that allows mutated cells
to grow.
and suppressing agents can slow or stop
progression of the growth.
Some agents inhibit invasion
and blood vessel formation (angiogenesis)
and can slow metastasis.